Draft for generating a certificate and importing one (#2890)
zowe/docs-site: docs/user-guide/configure-certificates.md

# Zowe certificate configuration overview

As a system programmer, review this article to learn about the key concepts of Zowe certificates, and options for certificate configuration.

Zowe provides the ability to [generate a certificate](./use-certificates.md) using the `zwe init certificate` command. Zowe can also be configured to [use an existing certificate](./import-certificates.md) provided by the user's security team in a z/OS customer shop.

> ## What Zowe certificates are used for?

Reviewer: This reads a little awkward. A better suggestion might be: What are Zowe certificates used for?

Zowe uses certificates to verify the identity and subsequently establish an encrypted network connection between applications. The connection is using the Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) protocol. Certificates and their associated private keys need to be stored either in a SAF key ring or in a `PKCS12` keystore.

## What certificates Zowe supports?

Zowe supports keystores and truststores that are either z/OS key rings (when on z/OS) or PKCS12 files.

### PKCS12 certificates in a keystore

Zowe is able to use PKCS12 certificates that are stored in USS. This certificate is used for encrypting TLS communication between Zowe clients and Zowe z/OS servers, as well as intra z/OS Zowe server to Zowe server communication. Zowe uses a `keystore` directory to contain its external certificate, and a `truststore` directory to hold the public keys of servers which Zowe communicates with (for example z/OSMF).

> By default, Zowe is reading PKCS12 keystore from `keystore` directory which can be located in zowe.yaml. This directory contains a server certificate, the Zowe generated certificate authority, and a `truststore` which holds intermediate certificates of servers that Zowe communicates with (for example z/OSMF).

Reviewer: I think this would read better: "By default, Zowe reads the PKCS12 keystore from the `keystore` directory ..."

> The use of a USS PKCS12 keystore is suitable for proof-of-concept projects as special permissions to create and manage the PKCS12 keystore are not required. For production usage of Zowe, it is recommended to work with certificates held in z/OS key rings. Configuring z/OS key rings may require security administrator privileges.  

Reviewer: I think this sentence reads a little weird. I think a word might be missing?

The JCL member `.SZWESAMP(ZWEKRING)` contains security commands to create a SAF key ring. By default, this keyring is named `ZoweKeyring`. You can use the security commands in this JCL member to generate a Zowe certificate authority (CA) and sign the server certificate with this CA. The JCL contains commands for three z/OS security managers: RACF, TopSecret, and ACF/2.

There are two ways to configure and submit `ZWEKRING`:

- Customize and submit the `ZWEKRING` JCL member.
- Customize the `zowe.setup.certificate` section in `zowe.yaml` and use the `zwe init certificate` command.

Use the `zwe init certificate` command to prepare a customized JCL member using `ZWEKRING` as a template.  

A number of key ring scenarios are supported:

- Creation of a local certificate authority (CA) which is used to sign a locally generated certificate. Both the CA and the certificate are placed in the `ZoweKeyring`.
- Import of an existing certificate already held in z/OS to the `ZoweKeyring` for use by Zowe.  
- Creation of a locally generated certificate and signed by an existing certificate authority. The certificate is placed in the key ring.

## Where to get started with Zowe certificates?

> 

Reviewer: To follow our style guide, this header should be rewritten to use gerunds: Getting started with Zowe certificates

[Zowe API Mediation Layer](../user-guide/api-mediation/api-mediation-overview.md), acting as an intermediary, is responsible for validating these certificates. When the API Mediation Layer receives a certificate from an external service, it examines each certificate in the certificate chain and compares it to the certificates in the "truststore."

By leveraging the truststore, Zowe ensures that only trusted and authorized external services can establish communication with its servers. The truststore validates the authenticity and integrity of the presented certificates, providing an additional layer of security.

#### Keystore and Key ring

Keystores are repositories that contain cryptographic artifacts like certificates and private keys that are used for cryptographic protocols such as TLS.

A keystore contains personal certificates, plus the corresponding private keys that are used to identify the owner of the certificate.
For TLS, a personal certificate represents the identity of a TLS endpoint. Both the client (for example, a REST client) and the server (for example, a IBM® z/OS® Connect server) might have personal certificates to identify themselves.

What is key ring?

> #### Extended key usage

Reviewer: to better follow our style guide: Extending key usage

Reviewer 2: "Extended key usage" is a technical property name of a key, it's not about how we extend keys.

**Note:**  
 A problem can occur when z/OS certificates are configured to explicitly act only as a server for northbound certificates with a `TLS Web Server Authentication (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.1)` OID. As Zowe's micro services authenticate to the API Catalog on USS using TLS, the certificate needs to be valid as a southbound client certificate. To maintain server northbound functionality as well as validation as a southbound certificate, ensure that the certificate contains the `TLS Web Client Authentication (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.2)` value in the Extended Key Usage section.

Additionally, the `Digital signature and/or key agreement` must also be set with the extension value in the Key Usage section. For more information, see [key usage extensions and extended key usage](https://help.hcltechsw.com/domino/10.0.1/admin/conf_keyusageextensionsandextendedkeyusage_r.html).

### Configuration in zowe.yaml file

Zowe records the final configuration in `zowe.yaml` file.

> ## How to manage certificates and verification in Zowe?

Reviewer: To follow our style guide: Managing certificates and verification in Zowe

* If you are using a key ring, the sample JCL member `ZWEKRING` provided in the PDS library `SZWESAMP` contains the security commands to create a key ring and manage its associated certificates. This is described in Configuring Zowe certificates in a key ring which provides instructions for how to configure Zowe to work with the following certificates.
    * a self-signed certificate
    * a certificate signed with an existing certificate authority
    * an existing certificate already held in the SAF database that can be added to the Zowe key ring.

For both scenarios, where the certificate is held in a USS Java Keystore or a z/OS key ring, the `USS KEYSTORE_DIRECTORY` is still required which is created with the script zowe-setup-certificates.sh.

* In the USS scenario, this directory holds the `.cer` and `.pem` files for the certificate itself.
* In the key ring scenario, this directory stores the location and name of the Zowe key ring and its certificates.

> ### Enable certificate validation without hostname validation

Reviewer: To follow our style guide: Enabling certificate validation without hostname validation

A proper setup of the truststore is mandatory to successfully start Zowe with `zowe.verifyCertificates: STRICT`.

## Choosing USS Keystore or z/OS Key ring to store Zowe certificates

Zowe supports certificates that are stored either in a USS directory **Java KeyStore** in the `.p12` format or, alternatively, certificates held in a **z/OS Key ring**. Use of a z/OS keystore is the recommended option for storing certificates if system programmers are already familiar with the certificate operation and usage.
Creating a key ring and connecting the certificate key pair requires elevated permissions. When the TSO user ID does not have the authority to manipulate key rings and users want to create a Zowe sandbox environment or for testing purposes, the USS keystore is a good alternative.

> ### Create a certificate authority and use it to self-signed a certificate

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Creating a certificate authority and use it ...

The `zwe init security` command takes its input from the `zowe.setup.security` section in the `zowe.yaml` file. To help with file customization, there are five sections in the file.

> ## Next steps: How to configure your certificate?

Reviewer: To better follow our style guide: Next steps: Configuring your certificate

## Keystore versus key ring

Zowe supports certificates that are stored either in a USS directory **Java KeyStore** in the `.p12` format or, alternatively, the certificates are held in a **z/OS Key ring**. Use of a z/OS keystore is the recommended option for storing certificates if system programmers are already familiar with the certificate operation and usage.
Creating a key ring and connecting the certificate key pair requires elevated permissions. When the TSO user ID does not have the authority to manipulate key rings and users want to create a Zowe sandbox environment or for testing purposes, then the USS keystore is a good alternative.

### PKCS12 certificates in a keystore

<!-- Zowe is able to use PKCS12 certificates that are stored in USS. This certificate is used for encrypting TLS communication between Zowe clients and Zowe z/OS servers, as well as intra z/OS Zowe server to Zowe server communication. Zowe uses a `keystore` directory to contain its external certificate, and a `truststore` directory to hold the public keys of servers which Zowe communicates with (for example z/OSMF). -->

> By default, Zowe is reading PKCS12 keystore from `keystore` directory which can be located in zowe.yaml. This directory contains server certificate, Zowe generated certificate authority, and a `truststore` which holds intermediate certificates of servers that Zowe communicates with (for example z/OSMF).

Reviewer 3: This statement needs language correction.

# Zowe certificate configuration overview

As a system programmer, review this article to learn about the key concepts of Zowe certificates, and options for certificate configuration. 

> Zowe uses digital certificates to verify the identity and subsequently establish an encrypted network connection between applications using the Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) protocol. Certificates and their associated private keys need to be stored either in the SAF key ring or in the `PKCS12` java keystore.

Reviewer 2: >or in the `PKCS12` java keystore.
It's just a PKCS12 keystore. The word java here will confuse.

> Zowe uses digital certificates to verify the identity and subsequently establish an encrypted network connection between applications using the Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) protocol. Certificates and their associated private keys need to be stored either in the SAF key ring or in the `PKCS12` java keystore.

Reviewer 2: "digital certificates". Never heard of certificates said this way. This sentence is way too technical for me actually, I felt overwhelmed reading it.

Zowe provides the ability to generate a certificate using the `zwe init certificate` command. Zowe can also be configured to use an existing certificate provided by the user's security team in a z/OS customer shop.
 

> ## Trust store

Reviewer 2: This appears out of nowhere - users will ask what's a truststore?
Point is, might want to reorganize this page for progressive disclosure.

I imagine the page would benefit organized as:

* As a collection of software that does networking, Zowe uses certificates for SSL/TLS & HTTPS.
* Certificates and their verification are managed within a keystore (certificate storage) and a truststore (verification storage)
* Zowe supports keystores and truststores that are either z/OS keyrings (when on z/OS) or PKCS12 files
* Zowe provides utilities for helping you generate the keystore & truststore, or re-use ones you already have. (zwe init certificate / JCLs)
* Zowe records the final configuration in the yaml.

### Disable trust store validation of certificates

To disable the trust store validation of southbound certificates (i.e. certificates used for secure communication in the direction from Zowe to the external services or components), set the value `zowe.verifyCertificates: DISABLED` in the `zowe.yaml` configuration file.  A scenario when this is recommended is if the z/OSMF certificate is be self-signed or uses an untrusted CA. In this case, Zowe API Mediation Layer does not recognize the signing authority.  

### Enable certificate validation without hostname validation

To enable certificate validation without hostname validation, set `zowe.verifyCertificates: NONSTRICT`. Using this setting, the certificate Common Name or Subject Alternate Name (SAN) is not checked. Disabling this parameter facilitates deployment to environments where certificates are valid but do not contain a valid hostname. This configuration is for development purposes only and should not be used for production.

A proper setup of the trust store is mandatory to successfully start Zowe with `zowe.verifyCertificates: STRICT`.

## Choosing USS Keystore or z/OS Key Ring to store Zowe certificates

> Zowe supports certificates that are stored either in a USS directory **Java KeyStore** in the `.p12` format or, alternatively, certificates held in a **z/OS Key ring**. Use of a z/OS keystore is the recommended option for storing certificates if system programmers are already familiar with the certificate operation and usage.

Reviewer 2: >Java KeyStore
Are we sure these are Java KeyStores and not just, PKCS12 files? PKCS12 files aren't inherent to Java, we just provide a way to automatically create them using Java. As far as I know, Java KeyStore is a file with a .jks extension, not .p12

Reviewer 4: Correct, the PKCS12 format isn't a Java specific thing.   I know that `keytool` is a Java utility that we sometimes refer to in the docs so it's possible that the **Java** prefeix is a throwback to that.

There are two ways to configure and submit `ZWEKRING`:

- Customize and submit the `ZWEKRING` JCL member.
- Customize the `zowe.setup.certificate` section in `zowe.yaml` and use the `zwe init certificate` command. 

Use the `zwe init certificate` command to prepare a customized JCL member using `ZWEKRING` as a template.  

A number of key ring scenarios are supported:

- Creation of a local certificate authority (CA) which is used to sign a locally generated certificate. Both the CA and the certificate are placed in the `ZoweKeyring`.
- Import of an existing certificate already held in z/OS to the `ZoweKeyring` for use by Zowe.  
- Creation of a locally generated certificate and signed by an existing certificate authority. The certificatate is placed in the key ring.

### Create a certificate authority and use it to self-sign a certificate

The `zwe init security` command takes its input from the `zowe.setup.security` section in the `zowe.yaml` file. To help with file customization, there are five sections in the file.

> ## Extended key usage

Reviewer 2: Important, but organized in a way users wont expect.
We should break down discussion into keystore & truststore.

* keystore
    * valid certificates
        * extended key usage
    * verification strict/nonstrict/disabled
    * domains / alternate names
    * expiry
    * client side requirements (how to not appear self-signed)

# Configuring Zowe certificates 

As a system administrator, review this article to learn about the key concepts of Zowe certificates, and options for certificate configuration. 

> Zowe uses a certificate to encrypt data for communication across secure sockets. The certificate used is specified in the `zowe.certificates` section of the `zowe.yaml` file. Certificates can either be a `PKCS12` certificate held in a USS keystore `.p12` file, or a `JCERACKS` certificate held in a key ring.  

Reviewer 5: Is `JCERACKS` a valid designation for the JCERACFKS, JCECCARACFKS, etc.?

Author: > Is `JCERACKS` a valid designation for the JCERACFKS, JCECCARACFKS, etc.?

Typo, thanks for pointing out. Will fix in the latest commit.

### PKCS12 certificates in a keystore

<!-- Zowe is able to use PKCS12 certificates that are stored in USS. This certificate is used for encrypting TLS communication between Zowe clients and Zowe z/OS servers, as well as intra z/OS Zowe server to Zowe server communication. Zowe uses a `keystore` directory to contain its external certificate, and a `truststore` directory to hold the public keys of servers which Zowe communicates with (for example z/OSMF). -->
By default, Zowe is reading PKCS12 keystore from `keystore` directory which can be located in zowe.yaml. This directory contains server certificate, Zowe generated certificate authority, and a `truststore` which holds intermediate certificates of servers that Zowe communicates with (for example z/OSMF).

USS PKCS12 keystore is useful for proof-of-concept projects because it does not require special permissions to create and manage. For production usage of Zowe, it is recomended to work with certificates held in z/OS key rings. Working with z/OS key rings may require system administrator priviledges and working with your z/OS security team. 

### JCERACFKS certificates in a key ring

> Zowe is able to work with certificates held in a **z/OS Keyring**.  

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Zowe is able to work with certificates held in a **z/OS Key ring**.  
```
